Downloaded what we submitted on 24 July 2020
today -- 16 October 2020 (as I had not heard back from Nicole and cannot easily figure out what she submitted)

Nicole Merrill	
Exploring grapevine phenology and high temperatures response under controlled conditions
Contribution to the field | Resubmission Statement | Abstract | 516527_Merrill_Manuscript.PDF | 516527_Merrill_Manuscript.DOCX | 516527_Merrill_Manuscript | Figure 1.TIF | Figure 2.TIF | Figure 3.TIF



Contribution to the field

The viticulture industry is currently faced with the task of adapting to a changing climate.Phenological timing, largely controlled by temperature, varies by winegrape variety, such that certain varieties may be better suited to produce high quality wine under a warmer climate.However, there is relatively little phenological data on most varieties of Vitis vinifera subsp. vinifera. We studied budburst and flowering phenology of 50 varieties of winegrape in a greenhouse. We found that the budburst and leafout phenology of greenhouse-grown vines significantly correlates to field observations, but many (28/50) varieties did not flower in the greenhouse.Of the varieties that formed inflorescences, ten were studied in growth chambers set at different temperatures (20 to 37 °C) to assess the rate the vines progressed from inflorescence development through flowering.While phenological timing was not significantly affected, plants in higher temperature chambers were more likely to abort their flower buds before flowering.This suggests that one potential outcome of climate change could be lower yields due to abortion of flower buds. Yet our research also highlights the challenges of growing diverse varieties in the greenhouse and suggests more studies on larger vines will be critical for understanding and exploiting variety diversity.



Resubmission Statement

This manuscript was originally submitted as an Original Research article type

Abstract
Climate change has challenged growers and researchers alike to better understand how warm temperatures may impact winegrape plant development across varieties. Yet multi-variety studies present challenges. Here we review studies of controlled warming on winegrape varieties alongside a new study of the budburst and flowering phenology of 50 varieties of Vitis vinifera subsp. vinifera in the lab, with a small set of plants exposed to higher temperatures (20, 26, 30, 34, 37°C mean temperatures in growth chambers) during flowering. We found few studies have examined more than one variety, which may be due to the challenge of growing diverse varieties together. Indeed, we found high variability in flowering success across varieties in the lab (28 out of 50 varieties had no flowering), which made it impossible to study variety-specific response to temperature. Across varieties, however, we found results in line with our literature review: higher temperatures did not have a significant effect on the rate at which vines progressed through the flowering stage, but higher temperatures did correlate with flower abortion. These results suggest a potential decrease in winegrape yields in a warmer climate due to flower abortion, but also highlight the challenges of understanding heat responses across many varieties.